#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
UNG
\end_layout

\begin_layout Title
UNG Not Gerris
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
P.
 D.
 Rosenberg
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
UNG is a library/Source code/program for modelling fluid flow and the atmosphere.
 It was written with the prmary requirement that it is easy to use and add
 new features.
 This means that it might not be the fastest model around but hopefully
 its other advantages will outweigh that fact.
 It was also built with the idea of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

seamlessness
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in mind, because the aim is that the model will have adaptive resolution,
 meaning any features must work at all scales.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Where does the name UNG come from?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
UNG Not Gerris arises from the fact that I was playing with an adaptive
 resolution flow model called Gerris and wondered about whether it could
 be made to do atmospheric simulations.
 After a while I decided probably not, so I wrote my own model.
 I was also tickled by the fact that it was a recursive acronym that was
 the reverse of GNU, but this software is nothing to do with GNU.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
So you want to make this model easy to use and add to, what makes this the
 case?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
UNG is object oriented.
 This means that instead or representing the data within the model by a
 series of matrices and then doing matric maths on them the model contains
 groups of objects which interact with each other.
 If you wish to modify the behaviour of UNG you create a new object which
 inherits from one of the existing ones which then simply replaces the default
 objects.
 You can even mix and match different types of objects in a simulation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
What are these objects then?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are three basic object types (called classes).
 These are Cells, Links and Simulations.
 When you wish to do a model run you create a Simulation.
 This Simulation contains a series of Cells and these Cells are connected
 to each other by Links.
 By inheriting from these classes you can modify the behaviour of an UNG
 run.
 These basic types divide the labour of the simulation making things easy
 to modify.
 A Cell knows only about the property of the fluid within it, so contains
 things like values for the concentration of tracers, the Cell's mass and
 size and has functions for calculating derived properties such as temperature
 and pressure.
 Anything that applies to a parcel of fluid in isolation is dealt with within
 a Cell object.
 By comparison, the Link knows nothing about the properties of the fluid
 itself, it's job is to tell the Cells about forces being applied to them
 by neighbouring Cells and how much material is being passed between Cells
 by the fluid flow.
 The properties advected between Cells are passed through links, but they
 are opaque to the Links themselves - the Links receive the properties of
 the advected material, and pass this to the Cell receiving the material
 but a Link is not able to access or interpret the values passed.
 The Simulation is responsible for creating the Cells and the Links and
 connecting the correct Links to the correct Cells.
 It is also responsible for incrementing tthe time steps and triggering
 the calcualtion of the new state, however the calculations themselves are
 performed by the Links and the Cells.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
What equations is UNG solving?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
UNG is essentially solving the compressible Navier Stokes equation, with
 an assumption of zero viscosity, however, because you are free to generate
 your own types of link you can change this at will.
 In one timestep the following things happen.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The Links interpolate the flow parallel to their direction from the Cells
 at either end to determine the volume of flow between cells.
 They grab the values of the tracer densities from each cell at this point.
 They also use the pressure of each cell to determine the pressure impulse
 applied by each cell.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The cells request the calculated pressure impulse and use this to calculate
 the change in velocity.
 They also request the advected volume and tracer densities and update their
 tracers accordingly.
 The tracers used are momentum in the three orthoganal directions, mass
 and potential energy, which is a combination of heat energy and the energy
 of compression of the fluid and is defined as the product of potential
 temperature and mass.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The cells momentum is incremented appropriately based upon the speed change
 calculated from the pressure impulse.
 The density of all the tracers is calculated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These three steps are triggered by the Simulation for each time step.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
What language is UNG written in? Can I write add-ons in language XXX
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
UNG is written in C++.
 If you want to add bits in another language then it is probably possible,
 providing you can build your code into a library.
 This library can then be linked into the UNG code.
 However you will probably still need to know about C++ to integrate your
 changes into the object oriented framework used by UNG.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
